20190730_jekyll.md, before:

# <img style="height: 1em;" alt="Jekyll logo" title="Jekyll logo" src="jekyll_logo.png"/> Jekyll

Today I'm trying out Jekyll!

# Installing
If you are familiar with Ruby on rails, this should go smoothly. See the [Jekyll page](https://jekyllrb.com/docs/#instructions) for the basic instructions. Since I was new, I just wanted to add the sidesteps I had to go from the instructions:

1. Install a full Ruby development environment <br>
    Apparently I already had this installed (Ubuntu 16):

    ```bash
    $ sudo apt install ruby
    [...]
    ruby is already the latest version (1:2.3.0+1).
    $ ruby -v
    ruby 2.3.1p112 (2016-04-26) [x86_64-linux-gnu]
    ```

2. Install Jekyll and bundler gems

    ```bash
    # I had not set up so gems could be installed globally, so I had to install it under my user
    $ gem install --user-install jekyll bundler
    # Then I had to add the Ruby gems to the path so I could execute them
    $ export PATH="$PATH:~/.gem/ruby/2.3.0/bin"
    ```

3. Create a new site at `./myblog` and go into the new directory

    ```bash
    # Here bundler would complain that it could not install all dependencies and failed (due to
    # lack of permissions). I therefore skipped the automatic install and made it install in my
    # user gems directory
    $ jekyll new myblog --skip-bundle
    $ cd myblog
    $ bundler install --path ~/.gem/ruby/2.3.0/gems
    ```

4. Build the site and make it available on a local server at port 4000

    ```bash
    $ bundler exec jekyll serve --port 4000
    ```

Now you can start adding posts in by adding the to the `_posts/` folder. As long as you run the `serve` option, Jekyll will keep updating the .html files everytime you change in the posts or assets. This is great when developing. It also has support for *livereload* so the web browser automatically refreshes when the site is changed.

# Post format
The posts are written in Markdown with a few additions:

1. Liquid
1. Front matter

# Liquid
Liquid is a form of scripting/templating engine similar to Jinja. It is statically built, but still versatile. It allows you to reduce repetitions (using objects, tags and filters), split source files (using includes), and apply formatting (templates). The version of Liquid that is build into Jekyll has some additions, but most of the time the [official Liquid documentation](https://shopify.github.io/liquid/) can be used as reference.

## Liquid objects
An object is really just a single unit that is processed by Liquid. It can contain for example strings, variables and filters. It is contained in double curly brackets:
```liquid
{{ object }}
```

A string is just contained in quotation marks:
```liquid
{{ "string" }}
```

Variables can be defined in either the front matter, by the Jekyll page builer, by plugins or in templates:
```liquid
{{ page.date }}
```

## Liquid tags
A tag can perform more advanced tasks, such as loops or inclusion of other files.
```liquid
{% tag %}
```

A conditional:
```liquid
{% if page.show_sidebar %}
  <div class="sidebar">
    sidebar content
  </div>
{% endif %}
```

We need to use the [specific tags for inclusion and linking](https://jekyllrb.com/docs/liquid/tags/#links) of resources, except for assets (and thus generated CSS):
```liquid
<!--- Including CSS generated from SASS -->
<link rel="stylesheet" href="/assets/css/styles.css">

<!--- Links -->
[Link to an asset](/assets/<asset_name>)
[Link to a post  ]({% link _posts/<a_post_name> %})
```

Special *include* files can be used to reduce repetitions, and allowing to split files for better legibility and structure. The file to be included has to be placed in `_includes/<filename>`.
```liquid
{% include <filename> %}
```

**NB:** To make Liquid preprocess the file, you must add the front matter (segue)!

# [Front matter](https://jekyllrb.com/docs/front-matter/)
The front matter is simply a header to the Markdown file with YAML format! It is both an indication that Liquid should preprocess the file, and a place where metadata can be defined for a post, such as the post's title and definitions of Liquid page variables (accessed as memebers of the variable `page`).

```liquid
---
# front matter tells Jekyll to process Liquid, defines page variables and other properties of the page
foo: a page variable
---

# My page

The variable foo has the value of {{ page.foo }}
<!--- i.e. a page variable -->
```

# Assets
SASS (superset of CSS) support is built into Jekyll.


# Directory structure
Here is a snapshot of the directory structure after basically just setting up the page and adding a post, as well as an asset. I will mention some about it.

```bash
$ tree
.
├── 404.html
├── about.md
├── assets
│   └── lorem.md
├── _config.yml
├── Gemfile
├── Gemfile.lock
├── index.md
├── _posts
│   ├── 2019-07-29-welcome-to-jekyll.markdown
│   └── 2019-07-30-first-post.md
└── _site
    ├── 404.html
    ├── about
    │   └── index.html
    ├── assets
    │   ├── lorem.md
    │   ├── main.css
    │   └── minima-social-icons.svg
    ├── feed.xml
    ├── index.html
    └── jekyll
        └── update
            └── 2019
                └── 07
                    ├── 29
                    │   └── welcome-to-jekyll.html
                    └── 30
                        └── first-post.html

11 directories, 18 files
```

So, some important things:

**Output directory**<br>
The whole site is built into the `_site` folder. All of the files needed to serve incoming HTTP connections are placed here, i.e. CSS, HTML etc. This directory can be specified to another path by supplying an argument to the `jekyll` command.

**Posts**<br>
Posts written in Markdown should be placed in the `_posts` directory and named as `<year>-<month>-<day>-<name>.md`. When built, they are placed in `_site/jekyll/update/<year>/<month>/<date>/<name>.html`.

**Other Markdown pages**<br>
Other markdown pages are processed and placed in the root of the output directory, such as `404.html` and `index.html`. However, the `about.md` page was treated diffrently since it had the attribute `permalink: /about/` in its *front matter*.

**Assets**<br>
Assets are placed in a folder called `assets`. When the site is build these are copied into the `_site/assets` folder together with e.g. the .css-output from .sass-files.


# Changing some files
The cool thing is that the webpage is updated instantly when any of the files are changed (but not the \_config.yml file):

```bash
$ bundle exec jekyll serve --port 4000
Configuration file: /home/emaus/blog/_config.yml
            Source: /home/emaus/blog
       Destination: /home/emaus/blog/_site
 Incremental build: disabled. Enable with --incremental
      Generating...
       Jekyll Feed: Generating feed for posts
                    done in 0.689 seconds.
 Auto-regeneration: enabled for '/home/emaus/blog'
    Server address: http://127.0.0.1:4000/
  Server running... press ctrl-c to stop.
      Regenerating: 1 file(s) changed at 2019-07-31 13:56:55
                    _posts/2019-07-30-first-post.md
       Jekyll Feed: Generating feed for posts
                    ...done in 0.313123519 seconds.
```

Commit message:

Adding summary of Jekyll post

20190730_jekyll.md, after:

# <img style="height: 1em;" alt="Jekyll logo" title="Jekyll logo" src="jekyll_logo.png"/> Jekyll

In this post I am going to test Jekyll! I will go through how to [install it](#installing) and some things I have learned on the way, such as how to use the [Liquid preprocessor](#liquid) and how Jekyll structures [its build output](#directory-structure).

# Installing
If you are familiar with Ruby on rails, this should go smoothly. See the [Jekyll page](https://jekyllrb.com/docs/#instructions) for the basic instructions. Since I was new, I just wanted to add the sidesteps I had to go from the instructions:

1. Install a full Ruby development environment <br>
    Apparently I already had this installed (Ubuntu 16):

    ```bash
    $ sudo apt install ruby
    [...]
    ruby is already the latest version (1:2.3.0+1).
    $ ruby -v
    ruby 2.3.1p112 (2016-04-26) [x86_64-linux-gnu]
    ```

2. Install Jekyll and bundler gems

    ```bash
    # I had not set up so gems could be installed globally, so I had to install it under my user
    $ gem install --user-install jekyll bundler
    # Then I had to add the Ruby gems to the path so I could execute them
    $ export PATH="$PATH:~/.gem/ruby/2.3.0/bin"
    ```

3. Create a new site at `./myblog` and go into the new directory

    ```bash
    # Here bundler would complain that it could not install all dependencies and failed (due to
    # lack of permissions). I therefore skipped the automatic install and made it install in my
    # user gems directory
    $ jekyll new myblog --skip-bundle
    $ cd myblog
    $ bundler install --path ~/.gem/ruby/2.3.0/gems
    ```

4. Build the site and make it available on a local server at port 4000

    ```bash
    $ bundler exec jekyll serve --port 4000
    ```

Now you can start adding posts in by adding the to the `_posts/` folder. As long as you run the `serve` option, Jekyll will keep updating the .html files everytime you change in the posts or assets. This is great when developing. It also has support for *livereload* so the web browser automatically refreshes when the site is changed.

# Post format
The posts are written in Markdown with a few additions:

1. Liquid
1. Front matter

# Liquid
Liquid is a form of scripting/templating engine similar to Jinja. It is statically built, but still versatile. It allows you to reduce repetitions (using objects, tags and filters), split source files (using includes), and apply formatting (templates). The version of Liquid that is build into Jekyll has some additions, but most of the time the [official Liquid documentation](https://shopify.github.io/liquid/) can be used as reference.

## Liquid objects
An object is really just a single unit that is processed by Liquid. It can contain for example strings, variables and filters. It is contained in double curly brackets:
```liquid
{{ object }}
```

A string is just contained in quotation marks:
```liquid
{{ "string" }}
```

Variables can be defined in either the front matter, by the Jekyll page builer, by plugins or in templates:
```liquid
{{ page.date }}
```

## Liquid tags
A tag can perform more advanced tasks, such as loops or inclusion of other files.
```liquid
{% tag %}
```

A conditional:
```liquid
{% if page.show_sidebar %}
  <div class="sidebar">
    sidebar content
  </div>
{% endif %}
```

We need to use the [specific tags for inclusion and linking](https://jekyllrb.com/docs/liquid/tags/#links) of resources, except for assets (and thus generated CSS):
```liquid
<!--- Including CSS generated from SASS -->
<link rel="stylesheet" href="/assets/css/styles.css">

<!--- Links -->
[Link to an asset](/assets/<asset_name>)
[Link to a post  ]({% link _posts/<a_post_name> %})
```

Special *include* files can be used to reduce repetitions, and allowing to split files for better legibility and structure. The file to be included has to be placed in `_includes/<filename>`.
```liquid
{% include <filename> %}
```

**NB:** To make Liquid preprocess the file, you must add the front matter (segue)!

# [Front matter](https://jekyllrb.com/docs/front-matter/)
The front matter is simply a header to the Markdown file with YAML format! It is both an indication that Liquid should preprocess the file, and a place where metadata can be defined for a post, such as the post's title and definitions of Liquid page variables (accessed as memebers of the variable `page`).

```liquid
---
# front matter tells Jekyll to process Liquid, defines page variables and other properties of the page
foo: a page variable
---

# My page

The variable foo has the value of {{ page.foo }}
<!--- i.e. a page variable -->
```

# Assets
SASS (superset of CSS) support is built into Jekyll.


# Directory structure
Here is a snapshot of the directory structure after basically just setting up the page and adding a post, as well as an asset. I will mention some about it.

```bash
$ tree
.
├── 404.html
├── about.md
├── assets
│   └── lorem.md
├── _config.yml
├── Gemfile
├── Gemfile.lock
├── index.md
├── _posts
│   ├── 2019-07-29-welcome-to-jekyll.markdown
│   └── 2019-07-30-first-post.md
└── _site
    ├── 404.html
    ├── about
    │   └── index.html
    ├── assets
    │   ├── lorem.md
    │   ├── main.css
    │   └── minima-social-icons.svg
    ├── feed.xml
    ├── index.html
    └── jekyll
        └── update
            └── 2019
                └── 07
                    ├── 29
                    │   └── welcome-to-jekyll.html
                    └── 30
                        └── first-post.html

11 directories, 18 files
```

So, some important things:

**Output directory**<br>
The whole site is built into the `_site` folder. All of the files needed to serve incoming HTTP connections are placed here, i.e. CSS, HTML etc. This directory can be specified to another path by supplying an argument to the `jekyll` command.

**Posts**<br>
Posts written in Markdown should be placed in the `_posts` directory and named as `<year>-<month>-<day>-<name>.md`. When built, they are placed in `_site/jekyll/update/<year>/<month>/<date>/<name>.html`.

**Other Markdown pages**<br>
Other markdown pages are processed and placed in the root of the output directory, such as `404.html` and `index.html`. However, the `about.md` page was treated diffrently since it had the attribute `permalink: /about/` in its *front matter*.

**Assets**<br>
Assets are placed in a folder called `assets`. When the site is build these are copied into the `_site/assets` folder together with e.g. the .css-output from .sass-files.


# Changing some files
The cool thing is that the webpage is updated instantly when any of the files are changed (but not the \_config.yml file):

```bash
$ bundle exec jekyll serve --port 4000
Configuration file: /home/emaus/blog/_config.yml
            Source: /home/emaus/blog
       Destination: /home/emaus/blog/_site
 Incremental build: disabled. Enable with --incremental
      Generating...
       Jekyll Feed: Generating feed for posts
                    done in 0.689 seconds.
 Auto-regeneration: enabled for '/home/emaus/blog'
    Server address: http://127.0.0.1:4000/
  Server running... press ctrl-c to stop.
      Regenerating: 1 file(s) changed at 2019-07-31 13:56:55
                    _posts/2019-07-30-first-post.md
       Jekyll Feed: Generating feed for posts
                    ...done in 0.313123519 seconds.
```

# Summary
To sum it up. I am quite amazed at how easy it was to set it up and install. Also creating new posts is super easy. The only downside I could think of spontaneously is that you become bound to the Liquid preprocessor when generating links, which I find not ideal.

The amount of plugins seems to be fairly limited. Here is [a list I found that seems to point out some good ones](https://github.com/planetjekyll/awesome-jekyll-plugins).
