20200406_setting_up_new_raspberry_pi3bplus.md, before:

# Setting up a Raspberry Pi 3B plus from scratch

Here I will show you basically all of the steps that are needed for installing a Raspberry Pi and setting up a new user on it.
I will set it up to have a user called `emaus` and hostname as `emaus-pi3`, but you can modify that to whatever you want and follow along.

## SD card
1. Write an image to the SD card with [Balena etcher](https://www.balena.io/etcher/) on Windows or [`dd`](https://www.raspberrypi.org/documentation/installation/installing-images/linux.md) on Linux.
2. Add a file called *ssh* to the root of the boot partition to enable SSH directly after boot

## Raspberry Pi config
3. SSH into pi with default user and password:
    ```bash
    emaus@pc:~ $ ssh -X pi@raspberrypi.local
    ```
4. Start to set up the pi through the config:
    ```bash
    pi@raspberrypi:~ $ raspi-config
    ```
    * Set hostname to something better
    * Expand filesystem
    * Set locale
5. Check that the date is set appropriately with `date` and set it if it is not.
6. Reboot so that our changes become effective (hostname, filestystem, etc.):
    ```bash
    pi@raspberrypi:~ $ sudo reboot now
    ```
7. SSH into pi with new hostname:
    ```bash
    emaus@pc:~ $ ssh -X pi@emaus-pi3.local
    ```
8. Update it:
    ```bash
    pi@emaus-pi3:~ $ sudo apt update
    pi@emaus-pi3:~ $ sudo apt upgrade -y
    ```

## New user
9. Add a new user with all groups that pi has (but not the `pi` group since we will remove that user):
    ```bash
    pi@emaus-pi3:~ $ groups
    pi adm dialout cdrom sudo audio video plugdev games users input netdev gpio i2c spi
    pi@emaus-pi3:~ $ sudo useradd -m -s /bin/bash -G adm,dialout,cdrom,sudo,audio,video,plugdev,games,users,input,netdev,gpio,i2c,spi <username>
    ```
10. Set password of the new user:
    ```bash
    pi@emaus-pi3:~ $ sudo passwd emaus
    New password:
    Retype new password:
    passwd: password updated successfully
    ```
11. Log out of the session as pi and enter as the new user:
    ```bash
    pi@emaus-pi3:~ $ logout
    Connection to emaus-pi3.local closed.
                                                                                                  ✔
    ───────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────
    [2020-04-06 20:31.58]  ~
    [Emanu.Emaus-XPS] ➤ ssh -X emaus@emaus-pi3.local
    ```

## Restoring files from an old Pi's SD card
By attaching the old SD card to another Pi, through an USB to SD card reader, I can copy old files to my new Pi.

12. Mount the partition that corresponds to the old root filesystem on the SD card as read-only ([see also previous post](20200405_backing_up_sd_card_from_crashed_pi.md)):
    ```bash
    emaus@emaus-pi4:~ $ lsblk
    NAME        MAJ:MIN RM  SIZE RO TYPE MOUNTPOINT
    sda           8:0    1 14.5G  0 disk
    ├─sda1        8:1    1   63M  0 part
    └─sda2        8:2    1 14.4G  0 part
    mmcblk0     179:0    0 29.4G  0 disk
    ├─mmcblk0p1 179:1    0  256M  0 part /boot
    └─mmcblk0p2 179:2    0 29.2G  0 part /
    emaus@emaus-pi4:~ $ mkdir mounttest
    emaus@emaus-pi4:~ $ sudo mount -o ro /dev/sda2 mounttest/
    ```
13. SCP files from the computer with the card reader (emaus-pi4) to the new pi (emaus-pi3):
    ```bash
    emaus@emaus-pi4:~/mounttest/home/emaus $ cd mounttest/home/emaus
    emaus@emaus-pi4:~/mounttest/home/emaus $ scp -r .ssh emaus@emaus-pi3.local:/home/emaus/.ssh
    ```
    Note that you might have to change priveliges on the .ssh folder to be able to copy it (or run command as sudo).

Commit message:

Adding step for removing pi user

20200406_setting_up_new_raspberry_pi3bplus.md, after:

# Setting up a Raspberry Pi 3B plus from scratch

Here I will show you basically all of the steps that are needed for installing a Raspberry Pi and setting up a new user on it.
I will set it up to have a user called `emaus` and hostname as `emaus-pi3`, but you can modify that to whatever you want and follow along.

## SD card
1. Write an image to the SD card with [Balena etcher](https://www.balena.io/etcher/) on Windows or [`dd`](https://www.raspberrypi.org/documentation/installation/installing-images/linux.md) on Linux.
2. Add a file called *ssh* to the root of the boot partition to enable SSH directly after boot

## Raspberry Pi config
3. SSH into pi with default user and password:
    ```bash
    emaus@pc:~ $ ssh -X pi@raspberrypi.local
    ```
4. Start to set up the pi through the config:
    ```bash
    pi@raspberrypi:~ $ raspi-config
    ```
    * Set hostname to something better
    * Expand filesystem
    * Set locale
5. Check that the date is set appropriately with `date` and set it if it is not.
6. Reboot so that our changes become effective (hostname, filestystem, etc.):
    ```bash
    pi@raspberrypi:~ $ sudo reboot now
    ```
7. SSH into pi with new hostname:
    ```bash
    emaus@pc:~ $ ssh -X pi@emaus-pi3.local
    ```
8. Update it:
    ```bash
    pi@emaus-pi3:~ $ sudo apt update
    pi@emaus-pi3:~ $ sudo apt upgrade -y
    ```

## New user
9. Add a new user with all groups that pi has (but not the `pi` group since we will remove that user):
    ```bash
    pi@emaus-pi3:~ $ groups
    pi adm dialout cdrom sudo audio video plugdev games users input netdev gpio i2c spi
    pi@emaus-pi3:~ $ sudo useradd -m -s /bin/bash -G adm,dialout,cdrom,sudo,audio,video,plugdev,games,users,input,netdev,gpio,i2c,spi <username>
    ```
10. Set password of the new user:
    ```bash
    pi@emaus-pi3:~ $ sudo passwd emaus
    New password:
    Retype new password:
    passwd: password updated successfully
    ```
11. Log out of the session as pi and enter as the new user:
    ```bash
    pi@emaus-pi3:~ $ logout
    Connection to emaus-pi3.local closed.
                                                                                                  ✔
    ───────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────
    [2020-04-06 20:31.58]  ~
    [Emanu.Emaus-XPS] ➤ ssh -X emaus@emaus-pi3.local
    ```
12. Remove the `pi` user (all sessions with that user must first be logged out, including GUI if using regular Raspbian):
    ```bash
    emaus@emaus-pi3:~ $ sudo userdel -r pi
    [sudo] password for emaus:
    userdel: pi mail spool (/var/mail/pi) not found
    ```

## Restoring files from an old Pi's SD card
By attaching the old SD card to another Pi, through an USB to SD card reader, I can copy old files to my new Pi.

13. Mount the partition that corresponds to the old root filesystem on the SD card as read-only ([see also previous post](20200405_backing_up_sd_card_from_crashed_pi.md)):
    ```bash
    emaus@emaus-pi4:~ $ lsblk
    NAME        MAJ:MIN RM  SIZE RO TYPE MOUNTPOINT
    sda           8:0    1 14.5G  0 disk
    ├─sda1        8:1    1   63M  0 part
    └─sda2        8:2    1 14.4G  0 part
    mmcblk0     179:0    0 29.4G  0 disk
    ├─mmcblk0p1 179:1    0  256M  0 part /boot
    └─mmcblk0p2 179:2    0 29.2G  0 part /
    emaus@emaus-pi4:~ $ mkdir mounttest
    emaus@emaus-pi4:~ $ sudo mount -o ro /dev/sda2 mounttest/
    ```
14. SCP files from the computer with the card reader (emaus-pi4) to the new pi (emaus-pi3):
    ```bash
    emaus@emaus-pi4:~/mounttest/home/emaus $ cd mounttest/home/emaus
    emaus@emaus-pi4:~/mounttest/home/emaus $ scp -r .ssh emaus@emaus-pi3.local:/home/emaus/.ssh
    ```
    Note that you might have to change priveliges on the .ssh folder to be able to copy it (or run command as sudo).
