site/_drafts/2020-06-06-firefox-search/2020-06-06-firefox-search.md, before:

---
title: Advanced search config in Firefox
date: 2020-06-06 13:08
#summary:
tags: [firefox]
categories: miniguide
---

![Firefox about:config - Proceed with caution](about_config_proceed_with_caution.png)
![Firefox about:config](about_config.png)

## Settings

{:.table .table-bordered .table-responsive-sm .w-auto .thead-dark}
| Setting                               | Value     |Description |
|---------------------------------------|-----------|------------|
| `keyword.enabled`	                    | **`false`**   | Perform a search instead if the text does not match an URL |
| `browser.urlbar.autoFill`             | **`false`**   |            |
| `browser.urlbar.suggest.searches`     | **`false`**   |  |
| `browser.fixup.alternate.enabled`     | **`false`**   | **`false`**: The URL:s entered will be interpreted exactly as they are written. <br> **`true`**: If the lookup of the URL fails, Firefox will try with variants with a prefix and suffix (from the companion settings `browser.fixup.alternate.prefix` and `browser.fixup.alternate.suffix`) |

# Sources
[1] <https://chirale.org/2019/05/19/disable-search-and-autocomplete-on-url-bar-of-firefox/>

Commit message:

Working on post header look
- Post image on top that is always centered, but with overflow hidden
  if it goes outside of specific min/max size ranges
- Simpler navigation between posts (newer, older)
- Adding black header to tables that has the theader-dark class

site/_drafts/2020-06-06-firefox-search/2020-06-06-firefox-search.md, after:

---
title: Advanced search config in Firefox
date: 2020-06-06 13:08
#summary:
image: about_config_proceed_with_caution.png
tags: [firefox]
categories: miniguide
---

Firefox has a bunch of settings that are not accessible through the regular.

![Firefox about:config - Proceed with caution](about_config_proceed_with_caution.png)
![Firefox about:config](about_config.png)

## Settings

{:.table .table-bordered .table-responsive-sm .w-auto .thead-dark}
| Setting                               | Value     |Description |
|---------------------------------------|-----------|------------|
| `keyword.enabled`	                    | **`false`**   | Perform a search instead if the text does not match an URL |
| `browser.urlbar.autoFill`             | **`false`**   |            |
| `browser.urlbar.suggest.searches`     | **`false`**   |  |
| `browser.fixup.alternate.enabled`     | **`false`**   | **`false`**: The URL:s entered will be interpreted exactly as they are written. <br> **`true`**: If the lookup of the URL fails, Firefox will try with variants with a prefix and suffix (from the companion settings `browser.fixup.alternate.prefix` and `browser.fixup.alternate.suffix`) |

# Sources
[1] <https://chirale.org/2019/05/19/disable-search-and-autocomplete-on-url-bar-of-firefox/>
